This free program is paid for by the listeners of Redwood Community Radio.
If you're not already a member, please think of joining us.
Thank you.
Welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name's Andrew Murray.
My name's Sarah Johanneson Murray. For those of you who perhaps have never
listened to our shows, they run
every third Friday of the month from 7 to 8 p.m.
and we're both licensed medical herbalists who trained in England,
graduating there with a degree in herbal medicine.
We run a clinic in Garboville where we consult with clients about a wide range
of conditions
and we manufacture all our own certified organic herb extracts which are
either grown in our CCUF certified herb farm or which we source from other
USA certified organic suppliers. So you're listening to Ask Your Herb Doctor
on KMUD Garboville 91.1 FM
and from 7.30 until the end of the show
at 8 o'clock you're invited to call in with any questions
either related or unrelated to this month's topic of weight gain.
The number here if you live in the area is 9233911
or if you live outside the area the toll-free number
is 1-800-KMUD-RAD. We can also be reached toll-free
on 1-888-WBM-HERB for further questions during normal
business hours Monday through Friday. Once again
we're very welcome to have Dr. Raymond Peat to share his expertise on the
subject tonight.
Again one of those subjects related to something that he
has a lot of experience with through his research into
thyroid and progesterone
other related compounds
that are essential if you like for
healthy metabolism and for anti-stress anti-aging effects.
So thanks so much for joining us
again this month Dr. Peat.
So I think as usual we want to give the benefit to those listeners perhaps who
haven't heard of you or
haven't tuned into this show before the benefit of your
past experience so if you wouldn't mind just detailing your academic
professional career to those people.
After I had taught linguistics and
English and such for a while I decided to go to graduate school in biology
at University of Oregon and
graduated there with my PhD in 1972
with specializing in physiology and biochemistry especially
reproductive physiology and right after I
left university I worked for a while with the
diet company counseling people in weight loss.
So that was 41 years ago.
Yeah. Okay well hopefully we're going to cover quite a lot of material here tonight
I know the subject surrounding tonight's topic of
weight gain or how to avoid it and what causes it etc etc will be pretty
pertinent to a lot of people even if they're not overtly overweight.
So I think one of the main things just to
let people know about apart from anything else is that
you do actually have a pretty active Facebook fan page Dr. Peat whether you
know it or not I don't know but
it's an active repeat
Facebook fan page for those of you who are familiar with Facebook and
use it that's something perhaps you might want to look at this pretty
lively debate and forum surrounding
most of those topics that we've covered with Dr. Peat over the last few years.
So I think one of those things that has come out
of the forum and I know it's something that we've noticed ourself
but that's not to say that it's unavoidable because it certainly is and
that's going to be the discussion of tonight's show.
I think one of those things that people
are asking each other on the Facebook page
is how people can adopt your diet
and not expect any weight gain.
I know the thing that most people have talked about
is some extra weight around the abdomen
in relation to your specifications for diet.
So Sarah what would you say?
I just think that's quite a broad statement.
You can't say that people adopt Dr. Peat's diet because
you know if we say milk is good for you
and you go and you start drinking a half a gallon of whole milk a day
you're going to put on weight unless you basically cut out all other calories.
This is where I think people get confused like how much milk should I drink
and if I don't want to gain weight should I drink whole milk or low-fat or you know.
The same with cheese too.
I advise eating cheese because of its high
calcium and protein content but you have to consider the calories because
some cheese has practically no fat
others are basically like soft butter
for their fat content.
Dr. Peat I guess what I wanted to start off with first then
was asking you this. One of the main
components to weight management then is a functional energy reserve
coupled with a healthy metabolism and this is your expertise so
would you outline perhaps what constitutes a healthy metabolism in
terms of
what we know is glucose oxidation versus the opposite the fatty acid
metabolism
that occurs with stress so our listeners can tell the difference.
Dr. Peat just to say that you've told us before that if somebody has an unhealthy
metabolism they'll have a hard time burning
1200-1000 calories a day.
About 30 or 40 years ago in which
doctors used to follow the textbook standard that
everyone can lose weight
if they eat less than 1700 calories a day
because that was studied in the 20s or 30s
on healthy people and so they
put a group of women who claimed that they were gaining weight on 1000
calories
put them in a closed ward and actually counted how much
food they were eating and some of them could maintain their weight on
700 calories a day especially women who had
dieted a lot because several adaptations
happen to chronic poorly balanced
dieting. The thyroid slows down
and especially the muscle tissues
atrophy from the stress of dieting
and if you think of the stress metabolism
as being very similar to
the diabetic metabolism
basically you shift over to burning
fat rather than sugar.
At rest your brain
and red blood cells need sugar
and they'll keep burning it
regardless of where they have to get it. If you don't eat enough
of the necessary nutrients
your body will convert your muscles to sugar
to keep feeding your brain what it needs and
if you are eating enough sugar
or things which can be turned into sugar
then your body doesn't have to break down its own tissues
to make the necessary glucose for your
blood cells and brain and in that condition
your muscles at rest don't require
practically any glucose. They can do fine
on a pure fat diet but that's the resting muscle.
If your muscles are under stress
after a very intense exercise the muscles
will begin burning almost pure sugar.
So it's the
massive muscle at rest
which will burn fat calories
and leave the protein
for your functioning tissues
and sugar to sustain your essential
brain and immune system. So this is why you're an advocate
of muscle building because then it helps convert your
fat into, well it helps your body to burn the fat for
fuel rather than just using the sugar. Yeah and
when the muscle is stressed it begins
actually producing estrogen.
When you're building muscle in a safe way
the muscle begins producing testosterone
actually right in the muscle which helps the rest of the body.
The heart is one of the main targets
of testosterone.
So well-developed skeletal muscles
are actually sustaining the heart muscle
as well as the brain and the lungs which need the stabilizing
anti-inflammatory steroids. So is this why
they find that when there's muscly people that they have
longer lifespans? One of the reasons you think?
Well yeah everything that
tends to kill you shrinks your muscles.
Fragility is the basic thing that
associates with aging. Bones and muscles
go away at about the same rate with aging.
Okay so getting back to
what you've started to outline under
what would be regular metabolism for the body to burn
glucose preferentially rather than
liberating free fatty acids to produce energy.
The diet starvation type model would then force your body
into utilizing stored fats for energy. Is that correct?
Except when it does that it also
needs to make some sugar for your brain
and so it breaks down the tissues. The first to go
is your thymus which in just a few hours
they used to think that adults
didn't have a significant amount of thymus tissue because
they looked at people who had died after being sick
and even if you die slowly after a traumatic accident
your thymus is gone. It just takes a few hours of intense
stress for the thymus to be dissolved and so a long fast
will just completely devastate your thymus
tissues. It turns into sugar very quickly.
That's important for your immune system right? Yeah and
the skin is relatively dispensable too in the long run
so your skin atrophies very quickly with a fast
or even a low calorie diet and
then the muscles go, you can live
months on your muscles providing sugar for your brain
if necessary if you have big muscles.
Lots of the women that I used to see
who were there for a weight loss diet
you couldn't find a bicep muscle
or a calf muscle. They couldn't
they would try to tighten their muscle and they couldn't feel or find
anything either in their upper arm or
lower leg. The muscle was
maybe the size of a person's index finger.
So when they would first start
eating a good diet, the first thing that would happen
would be pounds of water loss.
Their tissue would suddenly come out of the stress
condition and get rid of some of the stored water.
Then the muscle would start growing. The first week they might lose
10 or 15 pounds of water.
For about a month they would start putting on weight
as their muscles began growing.
Muscles are denser than fat, right?
A slender person with a well-defined muscular structure
would weigh more than a larger person that seemed large through
fat. Yeah, we would have people
measure their waist and thighs and hips
and each week they would get smaller as they gained weight.
Okay, as they started leaning and toning up
they shrunk in volume or they increased in mass.
So what about
athletes and you know like long-distance runners, people that are very
thin and lean? How healthy would you say their metabolism is?
There was a study
of using radioactive testosterone and
they not only saw that
the runners' muscles were atrophied
but comparing them to weightlifters who had developed
huge skeletal muscles, with these isotopes they could make a picture of
their
heart, lungs, and brain and so on.
All of their tissues had atrophied
so that the lean long-distance runners also had
lean, flabby hearts, very thin hearts.
And here that's supposed to be
a heart-healthy form of exercise. It's a stereotypical picture of health,
kind of Kenyan long-distance marathon runner.
You know a lot of things happen. Fertility is often
reduced because the testosterone goes down and the
very immediate thing that you can see in
even fairly low-intensity exercise
is that the lungs lose
some of their ability to diffuse oxygen in and carbon dioxide out.
The actual substance of the lung
air sac thickens with just a
fairly moderate amount of continued exercise.
Is that an inflammatory process that's causing that?
Yeah, it's a kind of edema, mild inflammation.
And sports anemia
is a recognized thing. It's a combination of
all of those little stresses and
shift away from the anabolic
testosterone to the... females are always
relatively anemic because of the influence of
the balance of estrogen relative to the
androgens. And sports anemia
is somewhat like the feminizing effect of estrogen on the blood system.
So the long-distance runner has a
deformed heart and deformed lungs basically compared to the body builder.
Yeah. Okay, well let's hold it there for a second. You're listening to Ask Europe, Doctor on
KMUD Galbraithville 91.1 FM and from 7.30 until the end of the show at 8 o'clock
you're invited to call in with any questions either related or
unrelated to this month's subject of weight loss. Our guest speaker here is Dr. Raymond Peat
and from 7.30 until 8 we'll be open for questions.
But Dr. Peat, moving on a little bit then in
a tangent direction, are some people
more predisposed to this kind of inefficient
glucose oxidation from other courses like
I know you've mentioned PUFA a lot or cortisol
dominant type pictures?
Yeah, lots of things can interfere with
your higher rate of metabolism. Things that
suppress your thyroid are the basic
most common thing but anything that can
increase your cortisol
or even your glucagon can
interfere with your metabolism, slow down your metabolic rate.
Serotonin,
estrogen for example, both lower
your body temperature and many
stresses can increase those and
those tend to increase the glucagon, shift you away from
being able to oxidize
the glucose and instead depend on
fatty acid oxidation. So sluggish digestion could increase
estrogen and serotonin and radiation could increase
estrogen and serotonin?
Yeah, the bowel is one of the ways
to get rid of unneeded estrogen
by way of the liver excreting it and if your bowel is sluggish
you reabsorb it and if your bowel is
irritated and sluggish it secretes
much more serotonin than needed
which affects your whole hormonal system bringing up the
stress hormones and contributing to lowered
temperature. So eating carrots
with vinegar or lemon juice or just carrots
and taking liver herbs like cascara and dandelion root
milk thistle can help with sluggish bowels?
Yeah, and just eating
what you consider to be the most delicious food
can greatly help the intestine
secrete more juices so
things digest faster and move along more smoothly.
So enjoy your food? Hopefully we can enjoy our food and
and hopefully it's not enjoying pufas which is fried
whatever. As long as it's not fried in a coconut
oil then it's bad for you.
Okay, so let's get back to where we were at the beginning
in terms of people mentioning that they can't help but
gain a bit of extra mid-weight and I think what we're
coming around to is that exercise and muscle building
however small or however gentle, however gradual is one of the most important
things
when adopting a typical diet that would certainly replace all the nutrition
that a person needs. I know your diet does that.
So in terms of gentle muscle building
how do you advocate that to happen say in a
sedentary 60-year-old lady
perhaps? Just doing an occasional
knee bend, squatting and standing up again
and maybe getting some five
pound dumbbells and
lifting those in different motions. Just a few lifts
two or three times a day
and when you're doing that maybe squat
once or twice. Right, because it really is about being actively involved
in generating muscle
however gently or however lightly the weight or the exercise would
involve. Okay, because you're saying essentially that muscle
in its own right effectively burns
glucose and the very presence of muscle with the increase
in testosterone will actually improve the metabolic rate.
Now another
direction then, you've mentioned
earlier on that
you said, and this is for the guys I think
preferentially because they probably have more of a chance to see this, but
you mentioned foaming urine as being an indicator of
an excess excretion of steroid hormone
precursors and being a sign of stress.
Well, yeah, in the morning
you have generally been exposed to
several hours of darkness and
darkness is very stressful.
Just staying indoors too much
gives you chronic stress from the absence of light
but everyone in the morning is at their peak
of being exposed to
stress hormones from the darkness and
during stress like starvation
the hormones first
try to mobilize energy
production and that during the night involves
increased free fatty acids. It's sort of like
doing a little marathon during the night
as far as the shift to fatty acids goes
and your liver if it's well
nourished and supplied with thyroid hormones will
process steroids such as
estrogen and cortisol which
reach it, the liver will attach
either sulfate or
sugar, glucuronic acid to make it
water-soluble so that then it can leave in the
bloodstream to the kidneys and be excreted.
And in that attached to
either the sulfate or the sugar
it's like a soap.
It's oily at one end and water-soluble at the other
and so it makes foam. And during the night the
fatty acids can be processed in the same way
and the liver especially recognizes
the unsaturated fatty acids but
whatever arrives during the night
is likely to contribute to that morning foam.
Okay, so I know you mentioned the liver's ability in
storing glucose for the night time
diet, fast if you like,
for the eight hours that we don't eat. So given that a person's consuming
adequate sugars during the daytime to stock their liver
for the night time fast
or given that the person would, as we recommend, and I know that you've
been an advocate and suggestion of this, that they're
eating a small amount of ice cream at night time before bed or they're taking a
glass of orange juice to bed with them to sip on whenever they wake up to
get a little bit of sugar so that their adrenaline is kept down and their
night time
stress response doesn't occur. Do you think that is that still possible for
somebody to have
foaming more morning urine in the presence of
sugars during the night time?
The stress always occurs but if you're sleeping
soundly and deeply there's less
intense damage from the stress. So if you stayed awake in the dark
you would probably have
super foamy urine in the morning.
And this is something else, perhaps during the daytime if
some of the guys notice what's happening with them during the day
this again would be another indicator of
insufficient sugars to block adrenaline and other stress hormones and that their
system is reasonably stressed. Yeah I think so.
And what about for females? Same thing.
This is not as obvious. I'm only saying it because of
how obvious it is.
So going on to
the shift in
fat content or fat makeup that you advocate from
are the recommendations that our listeners have heard over the last few years
in terms of increased saturated fats, switching to butter, coconut,
palm oil, excluding all the liquid oils
as sources of PUFA.
I know you've mentioned in the past that the
need to avoid PUFA is pretty paramount
if you really want to make a change in your physiology but
I think you've also said that it's very difficult to
avoid it totally because you're naturally going to produce some.
Well the natural foods
milk, beef, lamb, coconut,
oil and so on, these all have 2 or 3 percent
unsaturated polyunsaturated fats.
If you eat just a tiny bit more
then you're going to burn
right away. Some of it gets stored
in your fat tissue and what is stored is
preferentially polyunsaturated fats. Your body recognizes
that the good stuff to burn right away is the saturated fat
right after the sugars.
So it selectively doesn't burn
the polyunsaturated fat quickly
and so it's the most likely to be stored but then your fat
is the same way. Fat cells prefer to burn
saturated fat and so whatever you've
stored in your fat by eating more than you needed
over time your fat cells
use up the percentage of the stored saturated fat
and increase the percentage of the stored polyunsaturated fat so that
as you get older and fatter or even if you don't get fatter
as you get older your fat tissue becomes more polyunsaturated
so that each time you get hungry or
stressed and draw on your fat stores
for energy it is more
anti-thyroid and more pro-estrogenic
because of its increasing polyunsaturation
with time. So with a common recommendation of
this is a common recommendation I make is include three tablespoons of coconut
oil in your diet a day
but of course if we're talking about someone who only burns 700 calories a day
would you still make that same recommendation to do three tablespoons
of coconut oil? No, more like a small teaspoon three times a day.
Right, so I think basically what our listeners and we have to keep in mind is that
everybody's metabolism is at a different rate and if someone's eating a 1200
calorie a day diet and it's like perfect and they say I can hardly
anything well that's probably because they're only burning 700 and
they just keep gaining weight on 1200.
Alright so
is there any way then perhaps for those people who probably
we're talking about right now to be able to assess their metabolic rate given that
that is what is driving
how well they do or don't lose weight?
One way is just to look everything up in a
food analysis chart and measure the amount of
calories you're eating every day but another way is to
calculate or take note of
the fluid that you drink, milk, juice,
coffee, total volume of
fluid intake in a day and measure the
total volume of urine output in the same
period of time and the difference is what's evaporated
and in an average
level of activity and average relative humidity
a person will generally evaporate a liter
per thousand calories burned. So if you have
only a missing liter of fluid in the day you know you're only burning a thousand
calories.
So if someone gets a half a gallon of fluid a day
and they only pee out say
a couple cups
then you know that they're very
their system is very low thyroid.
Well yeah. I mean sorry very high thyroid.
A pint out of two liters that's a 1500 calorie
burning so that's not very much
either. Right but if somebody drinks a half a gallon and they practically pee
you know. A quart and a half that's
very bad. Bad ratio.
And a half a gallon that would be about two liters? Yeah.
I just thought we might want to remind listeners that it is 730
and the phone lines are open if people want to call in and have any questions
about the subject tonight.
Or any other subject that they're interested in
relating to the. Thank you Jordan.
Okay so excuse me I know you also
are very keen that females and males
do everything they can to limit their exposure
to estrogen for all its negative effects.
Estrogen dominant females this is something else that you
brought out that it's not you don't always take it for granted that
estrogen dominated dominant females would be
overweight with those what we typically imagine is estrogen
tendencies but actually you could get a slender
slender woman based on the same
the same conditions with estrogen. In the animal studies
they've seen that estrogen
excites some of the
metabolic processes while slowing
others down and it can make the animals
hyperactive
but very slender and
in people it there are
cases where it can do that same thing it can make
a woman tense very hyper
active and over sensitive and very skinny
but it can do the other it can turn on
the stress metabolism while it
slows the metabolism lowering the body temperature for example
and that can lead to
excess fat storage. And that's the same in men as well
excess estrogen can make some men very thin and excess estrogen can make some men
overweight. Is there any surefire way of
differentiating one condition in the two separate
physical pictures? No
nothing that I'm...
Do you know what the
the biological preference is for driving
driving in one or the other direction?
No. Okay alright
I had to ask but I'm sure there's something more
you'll bring out in a bit. We've got two callers on the line Dr. Peat so let's
take the first of the two callers. You're on the air?
This is David, hello. Hi David. Where are you calling from tonight David?
Yeah I think that's the other thing I want to bring everyone's
attention. Let's find out where everyone's from. I am from Missouri
Missouri. And I've
actually talked to Sarah a few times and emailed
and emailed Dr. Peat. I really appreciate this show by the way
I've listened to these podcasts. I've downloaded every podcast that you've done
You're very welcome. And that's what I listen to when I drive
and I just sometimes I've listened to several of these
over several times. And there's a lot in there. It takes a while to unpack it.
Oh yeah I know it's just amazing how it seems like each week that goes by I just understand this
more and more at a deeper level and I just
I love it. Well iPods are useful then.
Absolutely. And we're very grateful for Dr. Peat. I've got two
different sets of questions that still pertain to everything you've talked about tonight
One is I have a fairly weak
left knee and so I've been kind of experimenting with using
a rebounder. I've got two different types. A more soft one and then one that's
a little bit firmer. And I kind of go back and forth between the two. I do very light
you know just bouncing and then
also running in place or jogging. And I usually try to do that
you know like three to five minutes and I do that several times to the day if I'm at
home working
I'm just curious what you think of that.
Dr. Peat?
I don't know if there's much benefit to the
bouncing. It does strengthen your bones I guess
the compression and concussion
but something that builds more massive muscles
stress even though it isn't
fatiguing just
resistance training in little bursts I think
would help to raise your androgens and strengthen the connective tissues
That was one of the questions I was going to ask you Dr. Peat. So just using like different weights
and not doing too much stress but
trying to do a certain amount of repetitions where you're just strengthening
the muscles
that is a good thing to do. Yeah make the muscle
know that it's been active
warm it up a little but not enough to make you
get out of breath or anything. And then what do you feel about just doing basic yoga
you know like doing different postures and holding those postures where you're
actually holding the muscles in a
semi-stressed state but then relaxing it
Yeah that kind of stress is good for the muscles
Okay and then the other thing I wanted to ask you about you know I've
I've been using the 250 watt
bulbs that you had recommended and I've got three of those and I use those in
different places around the house because I'm a photographer I have light
stands so it makes it kind of easy to move them around but
I'm curious you know because you've talked about the
stress of darkness before you you know after the sun goes down and as you go into
the evening before you go to bed
do you think it's useful to use those
right before going to bed like say for 15 minutes to a half hour and then maybe
when you arrive in the morning maybe doing it for a half hour like while you're
drinking your coffee or
I think so and I'm basing that on some
studies that were done on plant tissues about
30 or 40 years ago they found that
any kind of tissue put in sunlight or ultraviolet light
got some excited free
radicals or excited electrons and
shining red light on those
would just immediately quench
those that had been excited but
if you keep living tissue in the dark
it starts building up
more of those excited electrons over a period of
30 minutes or so you can
see an increase in them. Wow that's great
okay and then just one last question is
dreaming a sign that you're having a certain degree of stress through the night
rather than being in a deep sleep where you're not remembering your dreams when
you wake up in the morning
and when you wake up in the middle of the night? Yeah the metabolism
has these cycles the
24-hour cycle is the basic thing but it is
subdivided into roughly 90-minute cycles
of ups and downs where the blood sugar and the adrenaline
everything is mobilized
a little bit and
if your liver is running short on
fuel the cycles become
more intense and the dream cycles
go with drops in the blood sugar
and surges of the nerve chemicals
such as adrenaline.
So if you were having a really great dream
that was exhilarating and you felt really good about when you woke up
would that still be the case because it's actually
causing you to awaken?
Yeah except that's probably that
your whole system recognizes that
it has been rested and it's time to get up and eat something
and that's often why you have dreams
in the early hours in the morning because that's when you run out of sugar at that point.
Yeah that makes sense.
What were you going to say Dr. Peat? If your body is well rested from
six or eight hours of sleep then the dreams are likely
to have a very pleasant quality
getting ready to go out and do something. It's preparing you to wake up
as opposed to the nightmares.
Yeah as opposed to the 1am nightmares.
So that means that your body is really stressed out and it's
not getting what it needs. Thank you so much for your call.
Thank you. Okay we've got two more callers so let's take the next caller.
Hi and where are you from? Yeah I'm calling from Piercy.
Okay just down the road.
I turned the radio on just in the midst of
the subject about urinating
and taking in fluid.
My question is if you take in a half gallon of fluid a day
and you pee out most of that
is that healthy or is that unhealthy?
It shows that you're not evaporating
very much so in an extremely humid
climate that wouldn't be so bad but
if you're indoors and have a relative humidity of about 50
then it means that your metabolism is
slow and not producing much heat.
I see. So you want a certain amount of evaporation
when the
atmosphere is in fact dry.
Yeah very healthy like
12 to 15 year old people
burn fuel very wastefully
but that's when people are the least likely to die is when they're wasting
fuel like crazy. So basically
when you say least likely to what? To die? To die yeah
around 12 to 15 people are the healthiest and
most resistant to stress.
So Dr. Peat. It's not based on wasting fuel though is it?
Yeah it looks like a waste to eat
thousands of calories a day when you're not doing anything but it's
good for you. I see. So a fast metabolism is that what you're saying?
Is it a healthier metabolism?
Yeah the wasteful energy metabolism.
Gotcha.
To answer another question caller
if you burn or evaporate half of what you drink so you pee out the other half
that's pretty much normal in our climate.
Wouldn't you agree Dr. Peat? If you drink
maybe three quarts of liquid. And you pee out a quart and a half?
Yeah.
I see that would be about an average norm.
Right because we don't have that high humidity like they do in the South.
Okay.
So you say that we don't have the high... oh okay gotcha gotcha
especially during the summertime obviously. Even drier.
Yes. Alright. Real good. Thank you. Thank you for your call.
Alright let's take the next call. Hi you're on the air? Hello Dr. Peat.
I'm reading... oh this is a fascinating show. Thank you so much.
Where are you from caller? I'm Southern Humboldt.
Okay. I'm reading that one
side effect of anti-anxiety and antidepressant
drugs is weight gain. Do you know how this works or do you know
how these drugs work at all?
If they increase your exposure to serotonin
or decrease your adrenaline they'll
slow your metabolic rate and
make it harder to burn calories.
Yeah that's interesting. Okay. Thank you so much.
And you know just how...
I'm reading also that they don't really...
there's no conclusive studies as to
relating a low serotonin level with any
mental state.
So anyway... Yeah they're not even sure how those
SSRIs work anyways. Now they're saying that it really doesn't have much to do
with serotonin.
Yeah and they don't have a very good
way of describing the topography of the receptors and all of that.
So if you can elucidate
any on that I would appreciate it.
I'll just hang up now and listen. Thank you for your call.
So Dr. Peat I guess the last question was
how are these antidepressants making people feel better
if it's not... if they are... if it has nothing to do with serotonin
increasing or decreasing or anything at all with serotonin?
They all work in slightly different ways.
So you have to think about each one
individually. Maybe we should
have a special time to go over
some of those specific chemicals.
Okay that sounds great. Okay well thanks for the call as it has been.
Okay so the lines are open.
From now until 8 o'clock if you live in the area numbers 1 800
KMUD Rad. If you live outside the area
the numbers 923... I beg your pardon if you live outside the area the numbers 1
800 KMUD Rad. If you're in the area it's 923 3911.
Okay so Dr. Peat
just carrying on with the topic of
the ideal diet that I know you've suggested before
which I know Sarah deals with quite a lot of people with this and you're
mentioning the quart of OJ. Do you want to mention
what you would normally be recommending? Well if you were... if Dr. Peat
would recommend something like a quart of orange juice, a quart of milk a day
and you wanted to lose weight, I mean you wouldn't have much room for anything else
if you only burn 700 calories a day. Well
if you use 1% butterfat milk
that's only 400 calories
per quart where
whole milk would be almost twice that much.
And one of the tricks
of orange juice is that there are some good chemicals
in it which are anti-astrogenic
and some other fruits, tropical fruits
are some of
the anti-estrogens are very important
for the metabolism as well as the
minerals and type of sugar and such.
So there's compounds you're saying in OJ even?
Yeah. That are anti-estrogenic?
Yeah and with milk it isn't just the protein but the calcium
is very important as an
anti-inflammatory, anti-
stress, anti-depressant
and so on. People who eat the same
number of calories without milk
are much more likely to be fat than the people
who are regular milk drinkers.
Why don't you tell us about your experience when you were in
Finland I think it was, Finland and Russia?
Well, in
Russia and Slavic countries in general
I found that there was really no
reliably good milk in the cities
and the people all had bad teeth
and were fat.
And food was very cheap but milk
was scarce and probably proteins in general
weren't as cheap as the average food.
But crossing over the border into Finland
it was very impressive to see
how many stores had
displays of cheese in the window.
And the people were all healthy looking and slender
compared to the other side of the border. Well we noticed the same thing in France.
You go to France and everywhere they all eat cheese.
And for the most part they're all very slender. So I guess what you're saying is that
400 calories from orange juice is not
comparative to 400 calories from baked potatoes and rice.
Definitely not. It stimulates your metabolism and suppresses
the stress hormones. Whereas 400 calories from baked potato and rice would
increase your stress hormones and suppress your metabolism.
Yeah. Then there's the matter of the starch particles.
If you don't have some saturated fat with them
the starch particles can set up a whole
pattern of stress and injury by entering your bloodstream.
Which people
taking supplements should be very careful to avoid anything with particles
such as titanium dioxide or silica.
Those are very allergenic particles that are in
all supplements practically. And those things getting into the bloodstream
trigger the stress hormones and obesity is
the least of the things they contribute to. Okay we've got a few more callers on the line
Dr. Peat. So let's take this first caller.
You're on the air and where are you from? Hello?
Hello you're on the air and where are you from? I've been trying to lose some weight
and I've been weighing myself periodically
at night time as well in the morning. And it seems to me that I'm
I lose about five pounds of weight sleeping.
Some nights I've noticed I've urinated. Sometimes
I haven't urinated. It seems always about the same about five pounds.
And I'm wondering where this five pounds goes
if it's with heat and if there's a relationship
between being cold at night
and warm at night. Whether you lose more weight in
cooler climates than you would in warmer. Even though warmer
climate people seem to be thinner than cooler climate people.
It depends on how you respond to the cold.
Some people steam up
the windows of the bedroom so the window
runs water down and
collects at the bottom of the window sill
in the morning. Those are people who lose a lot of weight by evaporation during
the night.
You can see the water collecting on the cool
surfaces. And then people in warmer climates
are warmer so their metabolism stay up during the night.
And they probably are thinner because of that, right Dr. Peat?
Yeah. When your body temperature drops
in the night because you're slowing it down to resist the stress.
But if you reach a certain temperature
you turn on the inflammatory stress-producing
hormones and so you get not only the darkness but the cold
extremities causing stress.
It's better to be comfortable if you're actually
trying to shed weight. It's better to be comfortable at night, correct?
Yeah. Okay. So that's reaching the low temperatures you mean, Dr. Peat?
Yeah. If your feet
reach 90 degrees Fahrenheit, they're producing
toxic stress-inducing substances.
So don't run around barefoot with cold feet.
We're always telling our nieces that. Always make sure to get the socks on.
I know my grandma's always... That's incredible.
Here it is. An advocate for keeping your feet warm when you get out of bed.
Cold head. Yeah. Well, cold head and cold feet.
Some people taking a warm foot bath at bedtime and then putting on
warm socks
and a wool cap sleep a lot better.
Okay. We have two more callers. So thanks for your call, caller.
It's a lot. Hi, next caller. You're on the air?
I'm here. Hello? Hello, I'm here.
Hi. Where are you calling from?
Is that me? Yes, it's you. Where are you calling from? I'm calling from
Phillipsville. Phillipsville. Okay. That's 15 miles up the road.
Okay. Go ahead. Well, there's a couple of questions I had.
One, I'm curious. In the beginning, you said something about
eating food that tastes delicious to you, was good for you, but you didn't say what
foods those were.
It varies with the person, but
you should try to avoid the
things that affect your metabolism harmfully, like starches and polyunsaturated
fats.
And some plant materials
are toxic. But otherwise,
just what appeals to you... Is it good to eat whole grains like brown rice and millet?
No, there's almost nothing of value in those.
Even if it's not processed?
I don't mean like white rice. Well, the white rice
is relatively free of irritants and toxins,
but it has very little of food value in it.
Well, I thought brown rice had a lot of vitamins and fiber and things that were good for you.
Not compared to, say, orange juice.
How about ice cream? You know, a good ice cream that doesn't have chemicals in it, like
Haagen-Dazs or something.
Is that good for you or not? I mean, it's got high calories.
Yeah, I mean, if you're trying to lose weight, then I wouldn't recommend you eat ice cream.
But if you're not trying to lose weight, you're happy with your weight, and you're
having trouble sleeping, it can help a lot of people
go to sleep. Milk and sugar is a bad food combination.
Uh-huh. I heard that... No, I wouldn't agree with that at all, Jordan.
If you have, like, some cheese or a small glass of milk or something, that there's something
in that that helps you sleep?
Yeah, milk contains a good balance all in itself, because it has some
fat, some protein, and some sugar. Well, I don't drink milk, but I do put half and half in my coffee in the morning.
Does that count?
I didn't hear that.
I said I don't usually drink milk by itself, but I put half and half in my coffee in the morning.
Does that count?
Well, no, that's mostly cream.
Well, and that's not good? I mean, it's fats, cream, and milk.
Well, it's okay if it goes with other food, such as protein and sugars.
Now, you mentioned orange juice a lot, but what other fruit juices?
I tend to really enjoy other fruit juices, like berry juice and peach juice and carrot juice and
cherry juice and all kinds of different juices, you know, that don't have sugar in them.
And I tend to drink them like half diluted with water, so they're not so strong.
But I've had people tell me that it's not good for me because it has too much sugar in it and too many calories.
So what do you think about juices other than orange juice?
Many juices are good.
It's the minerals and antioxidants, as well as the sugar that are important.
But grapefruit juice, for example, has a chemical that causes your liver to increase estrogen in the body.
Oh, no, I don't mean grapefruit juice. I'm thinking of, you know, like apricot juice, peach juice, berry juice, grape juice, those kinds.
Grape juice is very good as long as you consider the calories. It has more concentrated calories than orange juice.
Some tropical fruits are very good. Guava, for example.
Mango.
Carrot juice is another one that should be avoided, except in small amounts because of the high carotene content.
It's very metabolically suppressive.
Oh, it is?
It antagonizes both thyroid and progesterone.
What's good for thyroid?
You know, what's good for like stimulating your metabolism so that you, you know, you burn calories quicker, but you know, you won't have an overactive thyroid.
Milk, cheese and some of the fruit juices are the best things.
Right. So 400 calories from fruit juice isn't going to be the same as eating 400 calories of brown rice.
The 400 calories of brown rice is going to be much more metabolically suppressive than the 400 calories from fruit juice.
Yeah. Thank you for your call. But it is a couple of minutes to the top of the hour.
And I want to make sure that the listeners who are tuned in get to know Dr.
Raymond Peat's contact details. So unfortunately, we've come to the end of this show, Dr.
Peat. Thanks so much for your input and your your wisdom.
And I'm sorry we couldn't get to you.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
They had two more callers on the line, but I'm afraid we couldn't we couldn't get you.
Join us next month, March 15th.
So those people have listened to us and Dr.
Raymond Peat most especially his contact details at WWW dot Ray Peat dot com full of us as what we would call scientific articles, folks.
So not just hearsay, not just things that he's come up with, but a lot of his articles are fully referenced.
So there's plenty of science behind it. And that's  R.A.Y.P.E.A.T. Dotcom.
OK, so lots of articles there for people to read. And even the subject we've mentioned this evening, there's plenty of information there.
So thanks again for all the callers. And we can also be reached toll free Monday through Friday.
One eight eight eight WBM herb. So until the third Friday of next month, which is March 15th.
Yeah, we we look forward to speaking with Dr. Peat again and with those people who've tuned in.
Thanks so much for your time. Thanks for your callers. One month from today, we'll be back again with the herb doctor, the herb doctors.
Thank them so much for a great informative program.
Really glad to be here engineering tonight. Usually I'm enjoying that program from home.
Support for came it comes in part from Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup, an anti inflammatory, anti fungal, antibacterial,
antioxidant medicine made without heat or ice.
Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup is organic, edible, topical, cosmetic and water soluble.
Information is available at Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup at Gmail dot com and by phone at seven zero seven two two three one five six nine.
And to date, none of the positive attributes of Golden Dragon Medicinal Syrup have yet to be exaggerated.
Stay tuned. Funked up with Cousin Mark is next.
(gentle music)
(gentle music continues)
- It is eight o'clock and 53 degrees here in Redway,
home of the greatest radio station on the planet.
This one right here, Redwood Community Radio.
KMUD Garberville, 91.1 FM.
KMUE, Eureka Arcata, 88.1 FM.
KLAI, Leightonville, 90.3.
- Please remember that this program is supported
by the listener members of Redwood Community Radio.
If you like what you hear,
please consider becoming a member of KMUD
or renewing if you've already joined.
A regular yearly membership is $50,
but we accept any amount.
Help us keep free speech alive.